\[[Contents](./README.md)\]

# Gitlab Configuration

This is an example of managing the pyndev environment in a gitlab based CI
pipeline. This configuration should be minimal and lend itself to similar CI
systems such as Github actions. It is expected that will be quite a bit of
customization based on specific environment requirements and policies.

## Pipeline Environments

```
image: container-registry.example.com/automation/container-registry/ci-runner-image

variables:
  COMPOSE_PROJECT_NAME: pyndev-${CI_JOB_ID}
  UV_LINK_MODE: copy

.nso-version-matrix:
  parallel:
    matrix:
      - NSO_VERSION: ["6.5.7", "6.6.3"]
```

The ci-runner-image is a custom docker image purpose built for the pyndev
environment. At a minimum, it has dependencies such as uv, just, and docker
tools pre-installed. A docker in docker service is ran to support all the
Dockerfile operations and running test instances in CI. We can support multiple
versions of NSO by simply overwriting the `.env` declared version and run
pipelines in parallel. To support multiple instances of the environment we
update the compose project name to unique values. For the ephemeral CI runner
environments we disable a bit of the `uv` efficiency for stabilty with the
`UV_LINK_MODE` update.

## Workflow

The example `.gitlab-ci.yml.example` strongly follows a "gitflow" workflow. It
is assumed there is a `main` branch tracking officially released code updates,
there is long running `develop` branch that aggregates on going feature updates
prior to being "released" into `main`. Events on feature branches and `develop`
run lint, build, test jobs. Release is a special automation job that will
detailed below. Finally, when code is merged into `main` as a release that will
trigger lint, build, test, and publish jobs. Each job has a close parallel
`just` command corresponding with the CI function.

| just command             | CI job/stage |
| ------------------------ | ------------ |
| just lint                | lint         |
| just sync                | build        |
| just auto-test           | test         |
| just build, just publish | publish      |

> `just sync` builds the python packages but stores the artifacts internally,
> for publishing we need the additional `just build` that creates an external
> wheel for publishing.

### Gitlab Setup

There are many options and ways of establishing automation accounts and tokens
that this should be amended to your environment and is just one solution as an
example.

#### Gitflow branch protections

1. Create and set `develop` branch to default branch.
2. Protect both branches `main` and `develop` to restrict direct pushes.

#### Gitlab based container and pypi package registry

Example project structure:

```
automation/container-registry
automation/nso
```

With this hierchy we can add a deploy token under the `automation` group with
permissions to read and write both container registry and package registry
scopes. This allows the token to pull and publish both containers and internal
pypi packages generated by pyndev. By placing the token at the group level then
multiple instances of pyndev can share the same auth setup.

Add the deploy token to the group CI/CD settings with the following variables:

```
UV_INDEX_PRIVATE_USERNAME (token name)
UV_INDEX_PRIVATE_PASSWORD (token value)
UV_PUBLISH_TOKEN (token value)
DOCKER_AUTH_CONFIG (docker auth json with token_name:token base64 encoded)
```

### Test

```
test:
  extends:
    - .skip-on-release-updates
    - .nso-version-matrix
  stage: test
  rules:
    - when: never  # DISABLED: this is an example, need to confirm your environment to enable
  script:
    - just sync
    - just auto-test
  artifacts:
    when: always
    paths:
      - nso/test/test-logs/
    reports:
      junit: nso/test/test-logs/all-xunit.xml
```

Test results and logs are collected as artifacts and reports for human review.

### Publish

```
  script:
    - just sync
    - just build
    - just publish
    - |
      VERSION="${CI_COMMIT_TAG:-$CI_COMMIT_SHORT_SHA}"
      just build-nso-image "$VERSION"
      docker push container-registry.example.com/nso/pyndev/nso:"$NSO_VERSION"-"$VERSION"
```

The publish logic may been to be updated for the project's specific use case.
For example, a pyndev project that contains all NEDs or a subset of packages
most likely only needs the python wheels published to be used as dependencies
in another pyndev project.

### Release

```
spec:
  inputs:
    release_type:
      type: string
      description: "Specify a release type: standard, hotfix, or pre-release"
      options: ["none", "standard", "hotfix", "pre-release"]
      default: "none"
    release_version:
      type: string
      description: "Explicit version to tag to a release"
      default: ""
    release_notes_branch:
      type: string
      description: "Override release notes branch (default: release-notes)"
      default: "release-notes"

---

variables:
  RELEASE_TYPE: $[[ inputs.release_type ]]
  RELEASE_VERSION: $[[ inputs.release_version ]]
  RELEASE_NOTES_BRANCH: $[[ inputs.release_notes_branch ]]

release:
  stage: release
  rules:
    - when: never  # DISABLED: this is an example, need to confirm your environment to enable
  variables:
    GIT_DEPTH: 0
  environment:
    name: production
    action: prepare
  rules:
    - if: $RELEASE_TYPE == "standard"
    - if: $RELEASE_TYPE == "hotfix"
  script:
    - uv run --no-sync release --release-type "$RELEASE_TYPE" --notes-branch "$RELEASE_NOTES_BRANCH" --explicit-version "$RELEASE_VERSION"
```

The example shows a pretty specific setup for automating releases all built
around gitlab pipelines and tooling. This first part is declaring some pipeline
input variables that are presented as options to uses in the "Run new pipeline"
dialog inside gitlab. These support features beyond regular variables with the
defaults and typing constructs. The input values are relatively new at the time
of this writing and there were some issues with inline interpolation in various
gitlab rules and logic. For this reason, the input values are converted to
vanilla variables for better support.

The release job uses another custom gitlab feature that is the `environment`
configuration. This attaches the release logic to a gitlab construct that can
then be "protected" so that only a subset of users can kick off release
automation. The example project protects special branches `main` and `develop`
to allow only formal merge requests with robust approval logic. During a
release these branches may need to be rapidly updated and synchronized. The
local `pkg_mgmt` has a release script that utilize gitlab variables to run
these tedious tasks automatically bypassing normal human controls but is still
protected with the `environment` settings. User based protectes on an
environment is a feature available only on paid for versions of gitlab.

For a standard release the script can take an optional `release-notes` branch
with changelog or other metadata updates and merge that into `develop` and then
merge `develop` into `main` and finally creating a tag for the next minor
version following standard gitflow sequences. A hotfix release can initiated on
an emergency fix branch that is merged into `main` incrementing the patch
version and then merging back into `develop` synchronizing the two branches per
gitflow sequences.

> Note, there exist a `pre-release` input value that is matched in the publish
> job. This exists outside the normal release job so that it is not constrained
> by the protections an any user can publish artifacts for any branch at any
> point for evaluation.

#### Gitlab release authentication

Gitlab requires some additional repository configuration to support the
automated release script and branch managment actions.

1. Create a project access token for releases.

   This token will need api and write_repository scoped permissions in a role
   that can access the protected branches such as maintainer.
   
2. Allow the project access token name or role to be able to push and merge on
   protected branches main and develop as well as protected environment rules.
   
______________________________________________________________________

\[[Top](#gitlab-configuration)\]\[[Contents](./README.md)\]
